# ASD_Diagnostic_Research_2023-24

Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder which affects around 1 in 36 children in America. As of 2024, despite the amount of groundbreaking research identifying autism’s neurobiological underpinnings, there is yet to be an official diagnostic method for the condition; most diagnoses are made through developmental assessments made by physicians and developmental specialists, making it prone to human subjectivity. Hence, this research attempted to create an accurate diagnostic model for ASD based on fMRI (functional magnetic resonance imaging) scans by utilizing machine learning algorithms. The procedure for creating such a methodology involves many preliminary steps pertaining to the collection and cleaning of data for the model, including (1) the collection of datasets containing fMRI scans of autistic and neurotypical individuals, (2) the preprocessing and cleaning of the data using MATLAB, Python libraries, and other neuroimaging software, and (3) extracting only relevant features from the preprocessed data using specialized feature extraction methods. This study primarily uses a public, open-source Python script titled “How to download ABIDE Preprocessed dataset for autism detection” for downloading preprocessed timeseries data (based on different regions of interest) from the open-source ABIDE Preprocessed database. Essentially, timeseries data monitors the BOLD (Blood Oxygen Level Dependent) signal for different regions of the brain (which are derived from a predefined atlas of choice) across a series of time intervals; the BOLD scan is renowned for being an accurate indicator of neural activity across different parts of the brain. The diagnostic model is then developed by picking specific machine learning algorithms to optimize the model’s performance, then splitting the preprocessed data into subsections for training (‘feeding’ data to algorithms) and testing the model (testing whether the model’s prediction based on data input matches the actual diagnosis). The model’s effectiveness in diagnosis will be determined using the calculated evaluation metrics from the test sample, primarily the combination of sensitivity (recall) and specificity. In the first stage of experimentation for this initial model, different combinations of the ROI atlas, ML algorithm, and preprocessing strategy were tested and evaluated in quest to find the best combination of such parameters. Analysis of these results found that the machine learning algorithm used was the biggest determinant of the model’s performance, with the best-performing algorithm being Logistic Regression. Despite promising results with some of the LR models, the sensitivity and specificity, combined, never crossed 60%, implying that additional modifications must be done to the current model in order to enhance these metrics by at least 10-15%. The research proposes some areas of modification to the model for future development which might result in improved performance.
